--- page 1 ---
On the Opportunities and Risks of
Foundation Models
Rishi Bommasani* Drew A. Hudson Ehsan Adeli Russ Altman Simran Arora
Sydney von Arx Michael S. Bernstein Jeannette Bohg Antoine Bosselut Emma Brunskill
Erik Brynjolfsson Shyamal Buch Dallas Card Rodrigo Castellon Niladri Chatterji
Annie Chen Kathleen Creel Jared Quincy Davis Dorottya Demszky Chris Donahue
Moussa Doumbouya Esin Durmus Stefano Ermon John Etchemendy Kawin Ethayarajh
Li Fei-Fei Chelsea Finn Trevor Gale Lauren Gillespie Karan Goel Noah Goodman
Shelby Grossman Neel Guha Tatsunori Hashimoto Peter Henderson John Hewitt
Daniel E. Ho Jenny Hong Kyle Hsu Jing Huang Thomas Icard Saahil Jain
Dan Jurafsky Pratyusha Kalluri Siddharth Karamcheti Geoff Keeling Fereshte Khani
Omar Khattab Pang Wei Koh Mark Krass Ranjay Krishna Rohith Kuditipudi
Ananya Kumar Faisal Ladhak Mina Lee Tony Lee Jure Leskovec Isabelle Levent
Xiang Lisa Li Xuechen Li Tengyu Ma Ali Malik Christopher D. Manning
Suvir Mirchandani Eric Mitchell Zanele Munyikwa Suraj Nair Avanika Narayan
Deepak Narayanan Ben Newman Allen Nie Juan Carlos Niebles Hamed Nilforoshan
Julian Nyarko Giray Ogut Laurel Orr Isabel Papadimitriou Joon Sung Park Chris Piech
Eva Portelance Christopher Potts Aditi Raghunathan Rob Reich Hongyu Ren
Frieda Rong Yusuf Roohani Camilo Ruiz Jack Ryan Christopher Ré Dorsa Sadigh
Shiori Sagawa Keshav Santhanam Andy Shih Krishnan Srinivasan Alex Tamkin
Rohan Taori Armin W. Thomas Florian Tramèr Rose E. Wang William Wang Bohan Wu
Jiajun Wu Yuhuai Wu Sang Michael Xie Michihiro Yasunaga Jiaxuan You Matei Zaharia
Michael Zhang Tianyi Zhang Xikun Zhang Yuhui Zhang Lucia Zheng Kaitlyn Zhou
Percy Liang*1
Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM)
Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI)
Stanford University
AI is undergoing a paradigm shift with the rise of models (e.g., BERT, DALL-E, GPT-3) trained on broad
data (generally using self-supervision at scale) that can be adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks.
We call these models foundation models to underscore their critically central yet incomplete character.
This report provides a thorough account of the opportunities and risks of foundation models, ranging
from their capabilities (e.g., language, vision, robotic manipulation, reasoning, human interaction) and
technical principles (e.g., model architectures, training procedures, data, systems, security, evaluation,
theory) to their applications (e.g., law, healthcare, education) and societal impact (e.g., inequity, misuse,
economic and environmental impact, legal and ethical considerations). Though foundation models are
based on standard deep learning and transfer learning, their scale results in new emergent capabilities,
and their effectiveness across so many tasks incentivizes homogenization. Homogenization provides
powerful leverage but demands caution, as the defects of the foundation model are inherited by all the
adapted models downstream. Despite the impending widespread deployment of foundation models,
we currently lack a clear understanding of how they work, when they fail, and what they are even
capable of due to their emergent properties. To tackle these questions, we believe much of the critical
research on foundation models will require deep interdisciplinary collaboration commensurate with
their fundamentally sociotechnical nature.
1Corresponding author: pliang@cs.stanford.edu *Equal contribution.
1
arXiv:2108.07258v3  [cs.LG]  12 Jul 2022

--- page 2 ---
2 Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM)
Contents
Contents 2
1 Introduction 3
1.1 Emergence and homogenization 3
1.2 Social impact and the foundation models ecosystem 7
1.3 The future of foundation models 9
1.4 Overview of this report 12
2 Capabilities 21
2.1 Language 22
2.2 Vision 28
2.3 Robotics 34
2.4 Reasoning and search 40
2.5 Interaction 44
2.6 Philosophy of understanding 48
3 Applications 53
3.1 Healthcare and biomedicine 54
3.2 Law 59
3.3 Education 67
4 Technology 73
4.1 Modeling 74
4.2 Training 81
4.3 Adaptation 85
4.4 Evaluation 91
4.5 Systems 97
4.6 Data 101
4.7 Security and privacy 105
4.8 Robustness to distribution shifts 109
4.9 AI safety and alignment 114
4.10 Theory 118
4.11 Interpretability 123
5 Society 129
5.1 Inequity and fairness 130
5.2 Misuse 136
5.3 Environment 140
5.4 Legality 146
5.5 Economics 149
5.6 Ethics of scale 152
6 Conclusion 161
Acknowledgments 161
References 161

--- page 3 ---
On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models 3
1 INTRODUCTION
This report investigates an emerging paradigm for building artificial intelligence (AI) systems
based on a general class of models which we term foundation models.2 A foundation model is any
model that is trained on broad data (generally using self-supervision at scale) that can be adapted
(e.g., fine-tuned) to a wide range of downstream tasks; current examples include BERT [Devlin et al.
2019], GPT-3 [Brown et al. 2020], and CLIP [Radford et al. 2021]. From a technological point of view,
foundation models are not new — they are based on deep neural networks and self-supervised
learning, both of which have existed for decades. However, the sheer scale and scope of foundation
models from the last few years have stretched our imagination of what is possible; for example,
GPT-3 has 175 billion parameters and can be adapted via natural language prompts to do a passable
job on a wide range of tasks despite not being trained explicitly to do many of those tasks [Brown
et al. 2020]. At the same time, existing foundation models have the potential to accentuate harms,
and their characteristics are in general poorly understood. Given their impending widespread
deployment, they have become a topic of intense scrutiny [Bender et al. 2021].
1.1 Emergence and homogenization
The significance of foundation models can be summarized by two words: emergence and homoge-
nization. Emergence means that the behavior of a system is implicitly induced rather than explicitly
constructed; it is both the source of scientific excitement and anxiety about unanticipated con-
sequences. Homogenization indicates the consolidation of methodologies for building machine
learning systems across a wide range of applications; it provides strong leverage towards many
tasks but also creates single points of failure. To better appreciate emergence and homogenization,
let us reflect on their rise in AI research over the last 30 years.
Fig. 1. The story of AI has been one of increasing emergence and homogenization. With the introduction of
machine learning, how a task is performed emerges (is inferred automatically) from examples; with deep
learning, the high-level features used for prediction emerge; and with foundation models, even advanced
functionalities such as in-context learning emerge. At the same time, machine learning homogenizes learning
algorithms (e.g., logistic regression), deep learning homogenizes model architectures (e.g., Convolutional
Neural Networks), and foundation models homogenizes the model itself (e.g., GPT-3).
Machine learning. Most AI systems today are powered by machine learning, where predictive
models are trained on historical data and used to make future predictions. The rise of machine
learning within AI started in the 1990s, representing a marked shift from the way AI systems were
built previously: rather than specifying how to solve a task, a learning algorithm would induce
it based on data — i.e., the how emerges from the dynamics of learning. Machine learning also
2We chose the termfoundation models to capture the unfinished yet important status of these models — see §1.1.1:naming
for further discussion of the name.

--- page 4 ---
4 Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM)
represented a step towards homogenization: a wide range of applications could now be powered
by a single generic learning algorithm such as logistic regression.
Despite the ubiquity of machine learning within AI, semantically complex tasks in natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) and computer vision such as question answering or object recognition,
where the inputs are sentences or images, still required domain experts to perform “feature en-
gineering” — that is, writing domain-specific logic to convert raw data into higher-level features
(e.g., SIFT [Lowe 1999] in computer vision) that were more suitable for popular machine learning
methods.
Deep learning. Around 2010, a revival of deep neural networks under the moniker of deep learn-
ing [LeCun et al. 2015] started gaining traction in the field of machine learning. Deep learning
was fueled by larger datasets, more computation (notably, the availability of GPUs), and greater
audacity. Deep neural networks would be trained on the raw inputs (e.g., pixels), and higher-level
features would emerge through training (a process dubbed “representation learning”). This led to
massive performance gains on standard benchmarks, for example, in the seminal work of AlexNet
[Krizhevsky et al. 2012] on the ImageNet dataset [Deng et al. 2009]. Deep learning also reflected a
further shift towards homogenization: rather than having bespoke feature engineering pipelines for
each application, the same deep neural network architecture could be used for many applications.
Foundation models. Foundation models have taken shape most strongly in NLP, so we focus our
story there for the moment. That said, much as deep learning was popularized in computer vision
but exists beyond it, we understand foundation models as a general paradigm of AI, rather than
specific to NLP in any way. By the end of 2018, the field of NLP was about to undergo another
seismic change, marking the beginning of the era of foundation models. On a technical level,
foundation models are enabled by transfer learning [Thrun 1998] and scale. The idea of transfer
learning is to take the “knowledge” learned from one task (e.g., object recognition in images) and
apply it to another task (e.g., activity recognition in videos). Within deep learning, pretraining is
the dominant approach to transfer learning: a model is trained on a surrogate task (often just as a
means to an end) and then adapted to the downstream task of interest via fine-tuning.
Transfer learning is what makes foundation models possible, but scale is what makes them
powerful. Scale required three ingredients: (i) improvements in computer hardware — e.g., GPU
throughput and memory have increased 10 × over the last four years (§4.5: systems); (ii) the
development of the Transformer model architecture [Vaswani et al . 2017] that leverages the
parallelism of the hardware to train much more expressive models than before (§4.1: modeling);
and (iii) the availability of much more training data.
The importance of the availability of data and the ability to harness it cannot be underestimated.
Transfer learning with annotated datasets has been common practice for at least a decade, for
example, pretraining on the ImageNet dataset [Deng et al . 2009] for image classification in the
computer vision community. However, the non-trivial cost of annotation imposes a practical limit
on the benefits of pretraining.
In self-supervised learning on the other hand, the pretraining task is derived automatically from
unannotated data.3 For example, the masked language modeling task used to train BERT [Devlin
et al. 2019] is to predict a missing word in a sentence given its surrounding context (e.g., I like
sprouts). Self-supervised tasks are not only more scalable, only depending on unlabeled
data, but they are designed to force the model to predict parts of the inputs, making them richer
and potentially more useful than models trained on a more limited label space.
3Interestingly, self-supervised learning was dominant in the early days of deep learning [Hinton et al. 2006], but was for
a decade largely overtaken by pure supervised learning as labeled datasets became larger.

--- page 5 ---
On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models 5
There had been considerable progress in self-supervised learning dating back to word embeddings
[Turian et al. 2010; Mikolov et al. 2013; Pennington et al. 2014], which associated each word with a
context-independent vector, provided the basis for a wide range of NLP models. Shortly thereafter,
self-supervised learning based on autoregressive language modeling (predict the next word given
the previous words) [Dai and Le 2015] became popular. This produced models that represented
words in context, such as GPT [Radford et al. 2018], ELMo [Peters et al. 2018], and ULMFiT [Howard
and Ruder 2018].4
The next wave of developments in self-supervised learning — BERT [Devlin et al . 2019] GPT-2
[Radford et al. 2019], RoBERTa [Liu et al. 2019], T5 [Raffel et al. 2019], BART [Lewis et al. 2020a] —
quickly followed, embracing the Transformer architecture, incorporating more powerful deep
bidirectional encoders of sentences, and scaling up to larger models and datasets.
While one can view this last wave of technical developments purely through the lens of self-
supervised learning, there was a sociological inflection point around the introduction of BERT.
Before 2019, self-supervised learning with language models was essentially asubarea in NLP, which
progressed in parallel to other developments in NLP. After 2019, self-supervised learning with
language models became more of a substrate of NLP, as using BERT has become the norm. The
acceptance that a single model could be useful for such a wide range of tasks marks the beginning
of the era of foundation models.
Foundation models have led to an unprecedented level of homogenization: Almost all state-of-
the-art NLP models are now adapted from one of a few foundation models, such as BERT, RoBERTa,
BART, T5, etc. While this homogenization produces extremely high leverage (any improvements in
the foundation models can lead to immediate benefits across all of NLP), it is also a liability; all AI
systems might inherit the same problematic biases of a few foundation models [Bolukbasi et al .
2016; Caliskan et al. 2017; Abid et al. 2021, inter alia]) — see §5.1: fairness, §5.6: ethics for further
discussion.
We are also beginning to see a homogenization across research communities. For example, similar
Transformer-based sequence modeling approaches are now applied to text [Devlin et al . 2019;
Radford et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2019], images [Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020d], speech [Liu
et al. 2020d], tabular data [Yin et al. 2020], protein sequences [Rives et al. 2021], organic molecules
[Rothchild et al. 2021], and reinforcement learning [Chen et al. 2021b; Janner et al. 2021]. These
examples point to a possible future where we have a unified set of tools for developing foundation
models across a wide range of modalities [Tamkin et al. 2021b].
Besides the homogenization of approaches, we also see the homogenization of actual models
across research communities in the form of multimodal models — e.g., foundation models trained
on language and vision data [Luo et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2021a; Cho et al. 2021; Ramesh et al. 2021;
Radford et al. 2021]. Data is naturally multimodal in some domains—e.g., medical images, structured
data, clinical text in healthcare (§3.1: healthcare). Thus, multimodal foundation models are a
natural way of fusing all the relevant information about a domain, and adapting to tasks that also
span multiple modes (Figure 2).
Foundation models have also led to surprising emergence which results from scale. For example,
GPT-3 [Brown et al. 2020], with 175 billion parameters compared to GPT-2’s 1.5 billion, permits
in-context learning, in which the language model can be adapted to a downstream task simply by
providing it with a prompt (a natural language description of the task), an emergent property that
was neither specifically trained for nor anticipated to arise.
4The prescient work of Collobert and Weston [2008] is related: they trained on a scalable task akin to masked language
modeling jointly with downstream tasks, rather than producing a single foundation model that can be adapted after the fact
to downstream tasks.

--- page 6 ---
6 Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM)
Fig. 2. A foundation model can centralize the information from all the data from various modalities. This
one model can then be adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks.
Homogenization and emergence interact in a potentially unsettling way. Homogenization could
potentially provide enormous gains for many domains where task-specific data is quite limited — see
the opportunities presented in several such domains (e.g., §3.1: healthcare, §3.2: law, §3.3: edu-
cation); on the other hand, any flaws in the model are blindly inherited by all adapted models
(§5.1: fairness, §5.6: ethics). Since the power of foundation models comes from their emergent
qualities rather than their explicit construction, existing foundation models are hard to understand
(§4.4: evaluation, §4.10: theory, §4.11: interpretability) and they have unexpected failure
modes (§4.7: security, §4.8: robustness). Since emergence generates substantial uncertainty over
the capabilities and flaws of foundation models, aggressive homogenization through these models is
risky business. Derisking is the central challenge in the further development of foundation models
from an ethical (§5.6: ethics) and AI safety (§4.9: ai-safety) perspective.
1.1.1 Naming.
We introduce the term foundation models to fill a void in describing the paradigm shift we are
witnessing; we briefly recount some of our reasoning for this decision. Existing terms (e.g.,pretrained
model, self-supervised model ) partially capture the technical dimension of these models, but fail to
capture the significance of the paradigm shift in an accessible manner for those beyond machine
learning. In particular, foundation model designates a model class that are distinctive in their
sociological impact and how they have conferred a broad shift in AI research and deployment.
In contrast, forms of pretraining and self-supervision that technically foreshadowed foundation
models fail to clarify the shift in practices we hope to highlight.

--- page 7 ---
On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models 7
Fig. 3. Before reasoning about the social impact of foundation models, it is important to understand that
they are part of a broader ecosystem that stretches from data creation to deployment. At both ends, we
highlight the role of people as the ultimate source of data into training of a foundation model, but also as the
downstream recipients of any benefits and harms. Thoughtful data curation and adaptation should be part
of the responsible development of any AI system. Finally, note that the deployment of adapted foundation
models is a decision separate from their construction, which could be for research.
Additionally, while many of the iconic foundation models at the time of writing are language
models, the term language model is simply too narrow for our purpose: as we describe, the scope of
foundation models goes well beyond language. We also considered terms such as general-purpose
model and multi-purpose model that capture the important aspect that these models can serve
multiple downstream tasks, but both fail to capture their unfinished character and the need for
adaptation. Terms such as task-agnostic model would capture the manner of training, but fail to
capture the significant implication to downstream applications.
We chose the new termfoundation models to identify the models and the emerging paradigm that
are the subject of this report. In particular, the word “foundation” specifies the role these models
play: a foundation model is itself incomplete but serves as the common basis from which many
task-specific models are built via adaptation. We also chose the term “foundation" to connote the
significance of architectural stability, safety, and security: poorly-constructed foundations are a
recipe for disaster and well-executed foundations are a reliable bedrock for future applications. At
present, we emphasize that we do not fully understand the nature or quality of the foundation that
foundation models provide; we cannot characterize whether the foundation is trustworthy or not.
Thus, this is a critical problem for researchers, foundation model providers, application developers
who rely on foundation models, policymakers, and society at large to address.
1.2 Social impact and the foundation models ecosystem
Foundation models are scientifically interesting due to their impressive performance and capabilities,
but what makes them critical to study is the fact that they are quickly being integrated into real-
world deployments of AI systems with far-reaching consequences on people. For example, Google
search, which boasts 4 billion users, now depends on foundation models like BERT [Devlin et al.
2019] as one of its signals.5
5https://blog.google/products/search/search-language-understanding-bert/

--- page 8 ---
8 Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM)
We must thus pause and ask: What is the nature of this social impact? In this report, we address
many aspects of this question: the potential exacerbation of social inequities (§5.1: fairness), the
economic impact due to increased capabilities (§5.5: economics), the environmental impact due to
increased computation demands (§5.3: environment), potential concerns of amplifying disinfor-
mation (§5.2: misuse), legal ramifications due to powerful generative capabilities (§5.4: legality),
ethical issues resulting from homogenization, and the broader political economy in which founda-
tion models are developed and deployed (§5.6: ethics). Given the protean nature of foundation
models and their unmapped capabilities, how can we responsibly anticipate and address the ethical
and societal considerations they raise? A recurring theme is that it is easier to reason about the
social impact of specific systems deployed to specific users than it is to reason about the social
impact of foundation models, which could be adapted to any number of unforeseen downstream
systems.
Before attempting to answer these questions, we need to lay some groundwork. First, let us
distinguish between research on foundation models and deployment of foundation models. Most of
what is publicly known is foundation models research — through academic papers, demonstrations,
and progress on leaderboards. While the production of knowledge can play a vital role in shaping
the future, the direct social impact is through the actual deployment of these models, which is
governed by proprietary practices on often private data. Sometimes the deployment is through
new products — e.g., GitHub’s Copilot6 based on OpenAI’s Codex model [Chen et al. 2021f], but
often, it is through upgrades to existing products (e.g., Google search using BERT). Research models
are often not extensively tested and might have unknown failure modes; warning labels should
be placed on research models that are not fit to deploy. On the other hand, deployed foundation
models that actually affect people’s lives should be subject to much more rigorous testing and
auditing.
To further understand the research and deployment of foundation models, we must zoom out
and consider the full ecosystem that these foundation models inhabit, from data creation to actual
deployment. It is important to note that the foundation model is only one component (though an
increasingly important component) of an AI system. Simplifying, we can think about the ecosystem
of a foundation model in terms of sequence of stages, extending the training and adaptation stages
from before.7 Appropriately, as we’re interested in social impact,people occupy both ends of the
pipeline. This ecosystem view allows us to see that different questions about foundation models
(e.g., whether a foundation model is ethical) should actually be answered with respect to different
stages.
(1) Data creation: Data creation is fundamentally a human-centric process: all data is created
by people and most data is at least implicitly about people. Sometimes data is created by
people for other people in the form of emails, articles, photos, etc., and sometimes it is a
measurement of people (e.g., genomic data) or a measurement of the environment people
live in (e.g., satellite images). It is important to note that all data has an owner and is created
with a purpose (where that purpose may or may not include training a foundation model).
(2) Data curation: Data is then curated into datasets. There is no single natural distribution
of data; even the most permissive Internet crawl requires some selection and post-filtering.
Ensuring data relevance and quality while respecting legal and ethical constraints is critical
but challenging. While this is recognized in industry, it is underappreciated in AI research
(§4.6: data).
6https://copilot.github.com/
7In practice, the end of the pipeline is followed by monitoring, and feedback is used to readjust the previous stages.